docs(spicedb): Add best practises (#352)
authzed/docs: pages/best-practices/best-practices.mdx

# Best Practices

## Rule Categories

### Priority A: Essential

The essential rules are the most important ones.
Use them to ensure that your SpiceDB cluster is performant, your schema is sane, and your authorization logic is sound.
Exceptions to these rules should be rare and well justified.

### Priority B: Strongly Recommended

The strong recommendation rules will improve the schema design, developer experience, and performance of your SpiceDB cluster.
In most cases, these rules should be followed.

### Priority C: Recommended

The recommended rules reflect how we would run our own systems, but may not apply to every use case and may not make sense in every situation.
Follow them if you can and ignore them if you can’t.

## Priority A Rules: Essential

### Make sure your schema fails closed

Tags: **schema**

This is related to the idea of using negation sparingly, and of phrasing your schema additively.
Give thought to what happens if your application fails to write a relation: should the user have access in that case?
The answer is almost always `no`.

> ### Tune Connections to Datastores

Reviewer: Are there any other flags that should be tuned when configuring in production? For example: concurrency settings? cc @josephschorr 

Can we add them as a separate section, or maybe make this section more generic with "Tune Performance in Production", or maybe even create a separate page altogether?

Reviewer 2: We talked about this and even brought in Victor to ask about other things to pay attention to for tuning.

Most of them were action items for things that could have better defaults: https://linear.app/authzed/project/offsite-2025-action-items-d78bcbecafb3/issues

And database connection tuning is the only thing that we found that varies meaningfully from deployment to deployment and also can't be automatically configured (at least in open-source).

- For unit testing and TDD, use test relations + assertions and [zed validate](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/validation-testing-debugging#zed-validate).
- For snapshot testing, use test relations + expected relations and [zed validate](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/validation-testing-debugging#zed-validate).
- For integration testing, use the SpiceDB test server with spicedb [serve-testing](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/validation-testing-debugging#integration-test-server).

### Prefer Relations to Caveats

Tags: **schema**

If an authorization concept can be expressed using relations, it should be.
We provide caveats as an escape hatch; they should only be used for context that’s only available at request time, or else ABAC logic that cannot be expressed in terms of relationships.

Some examples:

- A banlist - this could be expressed as a list in caveat context, but it can also be expressed as a relation with negation.
- A notion of public vs internal - boolean flags seem like an obvious caveat use case, but they can also be expressed using self relations.

> - Dynamic roles - these could be expressed as a list in caveats, and it’s not immediately obvious how to build them into a spicedb schema, but our [Google Cloud IAM example](https://authzed.com/blog/google-cloud-iam-modeling) shows how it’s possible.

Reviewer: s/spicedb/SpiceDB

This is because caveats come with a performance penalty.

> A caveated relationship is both harder to cache and also slows down computation of the graph walk required to compute a permission.

Reviewer: Move this to the top, before the examples.

### Make Your Writes Idempotent

Tags: **application**

Relations in SpiceDB are binary (a relation is present or it's not), and `WriteRelationships` calls are atomic.
As much as possible, we recommend that you use the [`TOUCH`](https://buf.build/authzed/api/docs/main:authzed.api.v1#authzed.api.v1.RelationshipUpdate) semantic for your write calls, because it means that you can easily retry writes and recover from failures.

If you’re concerned about sequencing your writes, or your writes have dependencies, we recommend using [preconditions](https://buf.build/authzed/api/docs/main:authzed.api.v1#authzed.api.v1.Precondition).

### Don’t truncate your tables when running Postgres

Tags: **operations**

If you truncate your Postgres table, your SpiceDB pods will become unresponsive until you run SpiceDB datastore repair.

> We recommend either dropping the tables entirely and recreating them with spicedb datastore migrate head or deleting the data using a `DeleteRelationships` call instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend either dropping the tables entirely and recreating them with `spicedb datastore migrate head` or deleting the data using a `DeleteRelationships` call instead.
```

To ensure that every request, whether cached or not, gets a consistent point-in-time view of the underlying data, SpiceDB uses Multi-Version Concurrency Control.
Some datastores provide this natively; in others we’ve implemented it on top of the datastore.

> In Postgres, the implementation of MVCC depends on the internals of the transaction counter being stored as data in the tables, so if you truncate the relationships table you desync the transaction counter with the stored relationships.

Reviewer: I feel like this is too much detail and most people probably won't care for this level of information. But I won't block the PR for this

## Priority B Rules: Strongly Recommended

### Understand your consistency needs

Tags: **operations**

> While designing your authorization, it’s important to plan ahead for how quickly an update is guaranteed, while trading off performance via cache effectiveness.

Reviewer: What does "how quickly an update is guaranteed" mean? Did you mean like "how quickly relationships in your datastore are replicated across your clusters"?

Reviewer 2: I reworded this section a bit; let me know what you think.

> By default, SpiceDB sets the Quanitzation Interval to 5s; check operations are cached within this window.

Reviewer: Typo in Quanitzation

> To change this value, set `--datastore-revision-quantization-interval` longer or shorter.

Reviewer: I feel that this sentence doesn't help me decide _what_ value to use. A concrete example may help

### Use Unique Identifiers for Object Identifiers

Tags: **application**

Because you typically want to centralize your permissions in SpiceDB, that also means that most of the `IDs` of objects in SpiceDB are references to external entities.
These external entities shouldn't overlap.
To that end, we recommend either using `UUIDs` or using another identifier from the upstream that you can be sure will be unique, such as the unique sub field assigned to a user token by your IDP.

### Avoid ReadRelationships API

Tags: **application**

The `ReadRelationships` API should be treated as an escape hatch, used mostly for data introspection.
Using it for permission logic is a code smell.
All checks and listing of IDs should use `Check`, `CheckBulk`, `LookupResources`, and `LookupSubjects`.
If you find yourself reaching for the `ReadRelationships` API for permission logic, there's probably a way to modify your schema to use one of the check APIs instead.

### Prefer CheckBulk To LookupResources

Tags: **application**

Both `CheckBulk` and `LookupResources` can be used to determine whether a subject has access to a list of objects.

> Where possible, we recommend `CheckBulk`, because its work is bounded to the list of requested checks, whereas the wrong `LookupResources` call can return the entire world and choke both your datastore and your client.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Where possible, we recommend `CheckBulk`, because its work is bounded to the list of requested checks, whereas the wrong `LookupResources` call can return the entire world and therefore be slow.
```

LookupResources generally requires a lot of work, causes a higher load, and subsequently has some of the highest latencies.
If you need its semantics but its performance is insufficient, we recommend checking out our [Materialize](https://authzed.com/products/authzed-materialize) offering.

## Priority C Rules: Recommended

### Treat Writing Schema like Writing DB Migrations

Tags: **operations**

> We recommend treating your SpiceDB schema as though it were a database migration.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We recommend treating an update to your SpiceDB schema as though it were a database migration.
```

Tags: **operations**

In order to minimize load on the database, you can enable schema watch cache using the flag `--enable-experimental-watchable-schema-cache`.
The schema watch cache is a mechanism that improves performance and responsiveness by caching the currently loaded schema and watching for changes in real time.

While we recommend enabling this, it isn't enabled by default because it requires additional configuration and knowledge of your datastore.
For Postgres, [`track_commit_timestamp`](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/current/runtime-config-replication.html#GUC-TRACK-COMMIT-TIMESTAMP) must be set to `on` for the Watch API to be enabled.
For Spanner, there are a maximum of 5 changefeeds available globally for a table, and this consumes one of them.

### Use the Operator

Tags: **operations**

To ensure seamless rollouts, upgrades, and schema migrations, it is recommended to use the SpiceDB Kubernetes Operator if you’re using Kubernetes.
The Operator automates many operational tasks and helps maintain consistency across environments.
You can find the official documentation for the SpiceDB operator [here](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/concepts/operator).

> ### Ensure that SpiceDB Can Talk To Itself

Reviewer: Isn't this critical for performance? I would move this to "strongly recommended"

Reviewer 2: It depends a lot on both the workload and on the constraints of the user's runtime environment. If a user is running in ECS, there isn't a good way to do this. We decided it wasn't broadly applicable enough.

  - To gain a complete picture of your SpiceDB cluster’s performance, it’s important to export metrics from the underlying datastore.
    These metrics help identify potential bottlenecks and performance issues.
    AuthZed Cloud provides access to both CockroachDB and PostgreSQL metrics via its cloud telemetry endpoints, enabling deeper visibility into database behavior.
- The [profiling documentation](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/ops/observability#profiling) explains how to use the pprof endpoints.
- The [tracing documentation](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/ops/observability#opentelemetry-tracing) walks you through sending trace data to a Jaeger endpoint.

### Use Partials + Composable Schema to Organize your Schema

Tags: **schema**

As a schema grows in size and complexity, it can become difficult to navigate and grok.
We implemented [Composable Schemas](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/composable-schemas) to solve this problem, allowing you to break down a schema into multiple files and definitions into multiple problems.

> ### When In Doubt, Add Another Permission

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Don't reuse permissions across services
```

- For snapshot testing, use test relations + expected relations and [zed validate](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/validation-testing-debugging#zed-validate).
- For integration testing, use the SpiceDB test server with SpiceDB [serve-testing](https://authzed.com/docs/spicedb/modeling/validation-testing-debugging#integration-test-server).

### Prefer Relations to Caveats

Tags: **schema**

If an authorization concept can be expressed using relations, it should be.
We provide caveats as an escape hatch; they should only be used for context that’s only available at request time, or else ABAC logic that cannot be expressed in terms of relationships.

This is because caveats come with a performance penalty.
A caveated relationship is both harder to cache and also slows down computation of the graph walk required to compute a permission.

Some examples:

- A banlist - this could be expressed as a list in caveat context, but it can also be expressed as a relation with negation.
- A notion of public vs internal - boolean flags seem like an obvious caveat use case, but they can also be expressed using self relations.

> - Dynamic roles - these could be expressed as a list in caveats, and it’s not immediately obvious how to build them into a spicedb schema, but our [Google Cloud IAM example](https://authzed.com/blog/google-cloud-iam-modeling) shows how it’s possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Dynamic roles - these could be expressed as a list in caveats, and it’s not immediately obvious how to build them into a SpiceDB schema, but our [Google Cloud IAM example](https://authzed.com/blog/google-cloud-iam-modeling) shows how it’s possible.
```
